---
layout: post
title:  "What I learned about Computer Science at University"
---

I would like to relay to you my academic experience studying Computer Science in the heart of Canada's capital, at University of Ottawa.

I wanted to talk about this and relay to you year by year, the sort of things you'll be exposed to in Computer Science and whether or not this is something you would enjoy learning, as I also enjoyed. Parts of it of course, as every degree gets a little head of itself, for good and bad reasons but we will talk about it.

I suppose I should start with what does it take to get into a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science first, the **prerequisites** and the sort of mindset you need to have to tackle on this vision.

Of course the requirmenets to get in, will vary province by province, state by state, country by country. I went to Highschool here in the capital, and so my experience has been this. 

From the early start of Grade 11, I took all maths and sciences to prep for academia. Advanced functions, physics, chemistry, biology and computer studies. By far, the ones that spoke mostly to me were the maths and physics, followed by chemistry. I was not a big advocate for computer science at the time as our school taught us very little, only the binary system and some basic Python code. This followed through to Grade 12 with Calculus and Vectors, Physics, Chemistry, Computer Science and no more Biology. I dropped out of Biology as it is a difficult field, that required lots of memoriziation and in my opinion, less thinking and more knowing. Biology is an incredibly interesting field, but requires immense amount of specialization and although it has much mathematical application, it is done at the expert level mostly. You have to be an incredibly good mathematician to talk about genetics and evolutionary trees.

I got accepted into University of Ottawa in 2015 walking out with 87% average in HS. I was placed in an Honours program which is a deeper specialization in the field, that is suppose to prep you for a masters degree with emphasis on research in your final year. Little did I know about this option, I went in anyways. I should say that my original plan was to go into Engineering Physics instead which I also got accepted for in a different university, but after much discussion and convincing from my father, I chose to go into a more lucrative field, as IT was on the rise in jobs at the time and physists were looking for any job let alone in their fields.

My first year at university was definetely challenging to say the least. You are in some ways, being tested on sheer willingness to stay, rather than the creativity that you have. This was my first complaint about academia, that it scares people into never doing it again. Research, logic and finding out the truth to most people is actually a fun process, but when hit with rules and regulations, becomes a dull one. Nonetheless, first year is a time of exposure. You are introduced to a more formal approach to Linear Algebra and Calculus, you begin studying Python or Java at a deeper level, you start to hear words like 'object-oriented programming' and 'data structures'. You start to see code, simple yet effective code. My expectations of this year were shattered, I thought I would learn 10 new programming languages that we all love and know, that I would learn how to use software that no one knows how to use, but the road turned out to be quite different. I saw myself as a coder, and that was my second mistake.

My second year, was probably the one I learnt most in. I'm not sure if it was due to my adaptation or if the material has become more specialized, probably both. You learn algorithms, you learn discrete mathematics and data strucutres, you learn more about what constitutes a programming language, rather than learning some syntax and a few examples. In a way, you learn how to think like a computer scientist. You learn how to process information, and the limitations of this processing. You learn the basics of CPU, and its smaller parts like Arithmetic Logic Unit which I found deeply revealing.
You learn about registers and addresses, how to encode and decode information, how a sequence of bits can transfer to a display of pixels, etc. This was also the year, in which proofs are introduced at a deeper level. Mathematical proofs are not joke man, and if I ever had to think about something, it was proving a true statement that I know is true from childhood, but cannot prove for the life of me. Simple things like the 2 * any number will you give an even number, sounds pretty trivial, but the proof isn't so. The inductive step of +1 was not trivial. Lots of maths go into computing, hidden from us, for usability reasons. Algorithms and data structures is the most important thing to learn if you want to go into the job market. More importantly, time and space complexity of algorithms is even more important. Doing Big-Oh analysis will help you decide which algorithm performs more steps, deciding which algorithm we should use to tackle on a given problem. We want to be correct in our application, but we also want to be fast and light.


