---
layout: post
title:  "How video games shaped my mind for software"
---
Video games are much of a taboo topic of today's modern age. 

You'll often hear the older generation discussing video games as a time killer, waste of youth, bad for your eyes, bad for your mental health, bad for your soul, causing antisocial behaviour, etc.

Whilst it is true that playing video games can lead to a an insane time sink, that can be said for most of the entartainment industry today. Movies and TV series are notoriously known for their own time sink, and much thanks to streaming services today, have become an even bigger time sink of human potential.

#### TV/Movie vs 3D Game

The reason why you'd watch an episode of your favorite show, say Breaking Bad, is to find out about the progression of the characters and the general storyline. **Progression is key** in an episode, without the characters interacting and developing, the story becomes dull, it is no longer a story really. Humans, we do love progression. We love to find out more, curious creatures and all. Good video games setup a progressional approach to a defined set of goals. A goal is set by the designers, and finding a path to this goal is the responsibility of a player. I've always found this to be more interactive than thinking while watching a movie. You are definetely thinking in both, but you are making decisions in only one. A video game, in some sense, is a series of [computational decision problems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decision_problem#:~:text=In%20computability%20theory%20and%20computational,given%20natural%20number%20is%20prime.&text=A%20decision%20problem%20which%20can,an%20algorithm%20is%20called%20decidable.).

Some strategic games, especially historic real time strategy games, require you to pay attention to numbers, their modifiers and current environment. Which is why most children, do not play those type of games, as they actually require you to have some mathematical expertise (not much, depends on the game) and punishes you for not thinking correctly. I do know lots of young people who are mathematically inclined who love these sort of games, and are very good at them. I should say that its not the mathematics that children love, but logic itself. A constraint based system, well defined system that you can expect to work given a set of proper inputs. It is this form of game that can be of great use to the young generation. A sense of planning, a sense of prediction and if continuining down a proper path, a reward is given.

Of course, TV series and movies can teach you a lot as well. But their information is more knowledge based, rather than logic based. You are exposed to information bits about the Kingdom of England, or how to cook Methamphetamines in your basement. They do not enforce any formular strucutre on you, and most certaintly if you think of Jesse Pinkman in a wrong sense, the show will not punish you for it, the show will just keep on going. Your computer game will not, it will punish you and make you pay. Learning is a big process in this format.

#### Concerned Parents

Although I do agree with the older generation on much of their concerns about raising children in front of TV screens with remotes in their hands sweating their palms away at the idea of becoming a murderous hero killer or a stealthy assassin, I cannot deny the importance 3D gaming has played on my development throughout childhood leading to teenagehood and finally to adulthood. The importance that video games have taught me about computers, memory, algorithms and design is grand.

Aside to that, I also agree that video gaming can cause poor behaviour in the minority age group. It is probably not the main factor of poor behaviour (i.e being obnoxious, short-tempered, ill-willed, inability to focus, unwillingness to do chores) but it is a supporting one nonetheless. I have seen it, and it is not pretty. Especially when your child has been spoiled to the degree of no return, grows up to be a 20 year old man child who still shouts at people online about who killed who and the gun they used was shit. I have seen throughout highschool, lots of young boys generally, be swallowed by Modern Warfare 2 and League of Legends. They do not want to study, they do not want to eat, they are frail and skinny, and have no forseeable plan other than to score a trophy on a sequence of bits on a HDD. Video games set goals, and we are mistaken to prioritisize these goals over our life-goals.

#### Personal Experience

I'd like to extrapolate on my own experience with video games. I wasn't born into technology, in Eastern Europe the lack of Internet and computers was prevelant to the common people. I did not have Sony consoles, Nintendo or Tetris and my father shipped me his old work laptop from USA at the age of 12. An old Toshiba notebook, that had 256Mbs of RAM and a shitty processor but I only say this because of what we have today. This was 2007.

Over the years, I've learned more or less how software works to a trivial level. How to open up word documents, how to look at pictures and movies, how to send e-mails. It did not really excite me, to any degree of how computers work, until I got into video gaming. The reason why is although sending e-mails is a very complicated and tedious process of understanding protocols, security, packet sending and more, it is invisible to the eye of the sender, and the receiver. Processing word and excel documents is also incredibly complex with all the additional functionality that has been added over the years, grammer checking, equation insertion, sorting, filtering but again to a simpleton it does not matter. 

Assassin's Creed was the first game that truly shook the curiosity within me, as to how the hell can any man or group of men come up with such incredible piece of software.

It startled me, that there can be such a vision of design. That you can have 3D modelled characters, walking through a map with lots of interactive elements, with lots of encoded human animations, human actions. It startled me even more how the game was tied in historic context, and it played it out in a consistent movie narrative. Ubisoft created a revolutionary experience, and it bugged me that I did not how it worked. Not only was the game complex internally, it provided clean esthetics which during that time I believe most games lacked. It has to play right, but it has to look good too.

#### Software and Gaming

Video games, just like any other computer game, is a program. A solution to a given problem. The problem being our immense desire to create things that relate to ourselves. Now as we all know, gaming is not exactly what it used to be. The industry has grown immensely as financial software has grown, alongside search engines, database technology, computer simulations and more. Our hardware allows us to compute multiplication of insanely large matrices, thanks to [dedicated graphics processing units (GPUs)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graphics_processing_unit). Linear algebra applies directly to 3D modelling. Much of the game engines used today follow very precisely defined rules of physics. Now the rules of physics that apply to us isn't exactly what is required to render a game on the computer, but the relevant study of vectors, kinematics and forces does apply to game engine problems. We do not need to simulate gravitional force applied across the whole map, only to state where objects are placed, and how fast one can move, whether it'd be a particle or a playable character. In fact, trying to compute a gravitational force across the whole map costs a lot, and gives in return very little. Objects are static, they do not react with the atmosphere or its surroundings, only if we code it to do so. In some ways, a 3D gaming space, is a low resolution idea of our own space, with much of the forces of nature taken out, as they are more complicated than the intended outcome.

Although gravity is of little concern, there are things that seem trivial in real life that are still challenging to compute in modern industry. Light and shadows is one of those challenges. Game engines today invest incredible amount of resources into figuring out how to render a source of light, and how this light affects all the textures of the map. We are even trying to get Artificial Intelligence onto GPUs to figure out this problem.
