---
layout: post
title:  "Exercise, the fundamental reality to a healthy mind"
---

Throughout much of my life, I have been surrounded by sports and physical activities. In the modern age with less and less need for activities, as we become more and more self-dependant, the desire to run or to lift weights or to shape our bodies has become more of an esthetic quality rather than a functional requirement.

Too many times in my early 20s, I have heard peers and colleagues complain about their back problems, their spine, their shoulder, their knees. Some people even decide by mid 20s that their prime has gone and they will be facing these issues for the rest of their lives. They think they just have to deal with them.

When have we become so stale? We know that our minds are malluable, we can learn new things, we can adapt. And yet we do not think this way about our bodies and our health.

Why have young people decided that if they do not look like a genetic freak, to abandon all pursuits of health in the hopes that their genius will make up for it? In the hopes that pursuing academic goals, they will achieve enough success to attain enough income to fix all their bodily problems with surgeries, massages, duct tape solutions?

Exercise, fundamentally, is the route to all stress relief. Just ask Leo Tolstoy. (bad joke)

Whenever my mind has been clogged, either stressed or tired, I have gone to the pull up bar. Working out, lifting weights or doing body-weight exercises has been probably one of the greatest motivators to get me where I need to go.

Much of my life has been spent behind a desk in a room, either studying or coding. I assume this is the case for most Americans today. This inactive lifestyle not only causes weakness and instability in our bodies, it causes mental depression and exhaustion. We are not computers, we do not operate the same way all the time. Humans are creative creatures, creatures of reason, but reason and creativity can only work if one gives the body what it needs. And what the body needs is movement.

I was told a few years ago by a holistic doctor that the best form of exercise for the human body is the exercise of walking.

Not to run, not to sprint or to bike, not to lift weights or to do crazy gymnastics but the most mundane activity of all, which is to walk...as we have done for thousands of years. The reason why the doctor said so, as explained by her, is that every other form of exercise in the long run puts stress on the joints, the nerves and eventually wears down and tears down muscle fibers. 

Just ask your typical olympic athlete, they are really good at what they do, but at a cost. I've learned over the years that the best athletes are not simply born with gifts, but they are in active process of trading risk. They trade their bodies, in the pursuit of a dream, which is a great virtue. 

Armwrestlers, after doing an incredible amount of static work (static lifts with dumbbells) become incredibly strong at a particular angle. Their wrist, bulletproof, their forearm looks like their calf. When you see one, it looks like they're carrying two giant hammers, on a regular body. But if you ask an armwrestler to straighten out his/her arm, most cannot do so. Their arm overtime adapts to a certain angle, which allows them to load up lots of weight but their flexibility goes out the window. They have traded their body, for the pursuit of a dream. This motion in a prolonged period of time requires sacrifice for the reward of precised mastery. 

If you ask a heavy benchpresser, to put on a set of gloves and box for 2 minutes, they will gas out. More interestingly, they cannot throw straight punches due their pecs being too big. They gained strength in the push force, but they have lost their flexibility. Always a trade-off, always a cost to bussiness. There are great boxers who are also great benchpressers too. Freaks of nature.

Of course, I'm also a big believer in pull ups, as it seems to me and many others as the fundamental activity of our ancestors, to hang from trees. Hanging allows our spine to stretch out, it activates almost all the muscles in our upper body and stabilizes our core. Bodyweight exercises in general cannot be disputed. You cannot go wrong with it, it cannot break you and will only improve your overall health. It is mundane to do if you are trying to put on serious muscle however.

To me, this has always been a question of balance.

