---
layout: post
title:  "Why man has developed reason"
---

This is a personal piece, pseudo-scientific at best of the reasons I believe man has evolutionarilly developed reason.

The mind is a mysterious thing, generated by the brain, supported by our bodily functions. The brain is by far the busiest organ out of all organs, with the lead runnerups being the heart and the liver. Without the brain, we cannot opertate, our hormones do not function by themselves, our organs do not operate independtly. Everything in the body is interconnected, including the mind and our emotions.

There has been much dispute, in how finitely can we seperate the mind from the emotions. We know they are not the same thing, we know reason and thought is not the same as anger or hapiness. We suspect and with much evidence to support this that hapiness is a result of the firing of dopamine in our brain, a specific type of hormone that regulates elevated mood. What causes this trigger is still unknown, although neuroscientists have suspected that it is a pleasure-reward system that nature has given us to tell ourselves when we have done something correctly.

Well, what is it that we do that is correct dictated by nature? I guess we can start off by listing out the things that make us happy, as humanity.

Sexual reproduction is one reason why dopamine release exists, to my suspicion. Nature wants us to reproduce, chemistry wants us to react. If we are succesful at reproducing, then nature rewards us with a feeling. This feeling is not permenant, and is probably so due to the fact that nature wants us to keep reproducing until we no longer can. Eating food does make us happy, and nature wants us to eat to survive. 

Emotions and feelings, to some extent are very ancient. Animals feel pain, they are sorrow and happy at times, they exhibit emotions for same reasons we do, nature dictates this. 

But the mind, in some ways, can reject nature. It can do things that are not expected of its environment. People with reason, can drive themselves to suicide which is by no means something that nature wants, or intends. People with reason, can reject their emotions in the pursuit of a dream or a goal. 

Goals...the mind can create goals for its carrier. The mind can forsee the future, it can predict the future based on memories of the past.

I've stumbled upon Carl Jung in my early 20s mostly due to watching Jordan Peterson, where he also poses these questions. 

What is the nature of the mind? 

Carl Jung, forgive me for my poor intepretation, believed that imagination was the root of it all.

I cannoy deny, that my mental process is a form of a dream that I play out to myself. Where I imagine different scenarios or outcomes, with slightly different variations of events or topics. I suspect most of us feel that same way, where thinking is a form of a dream, not quite linear but also not concurrent, it has a shape but the shape can bend and twist to something grander.

Evolutionary-wise, why would nature give us the ability to imagine different realistic outcomes in our heads? It sounds like a great tool for survival, perhaps it is. Perhaps our ancestors, over-time through much genetic mutation, slowly passed down to their children the ability to imagine dangerous scenarios. To be able to predict an outcome of a current reality, to then be able to dodge or head straight forward towards the future. 

Some people think that the only thing that seperates ourselves from animals is the ability to forsee the future. 
The ability to predict, ability to plan ahead, not just a few seconds ahead, but days ahead. Years ahead. Why is it that we are all afraid of snakes? Why is it that we all see light as a form of enlightnement? Could it not be that parts of our imagination is encoded in our genetics?

Could it be the case, that after thousands of years of harsh exploration, that those of us so few who survived, survived because their imagination was deeper and more precise than of those who could not reproduce? Could it be that those few, were able to have children and those children's children simply due to their ability to assess multiple realities at once, to pick one that suits them best for their survival and to follow through with whatever actions it took to get them there?

Much of everything we do has to be taught to us. How to read, how to write, how to walk but we are never taught how to imagine. We see the future ahead of us better if we are more educated of course, as there are tools that our imagination can use. But a man with no formal education, will still dream and imagine and use his mind to predict, and then to survive.

When you solve a problem in front of you, you are imagining the possibile outcomes. You then pick the imaginated path that you see is most consistent with the problem you are trying to solve. It is clear, that a problem cannot be solved if you are stuck on a narrow path in your mind. Your imagination is the way out of every problem, the angle you approach a problem is the key to understanding it.

Nikola Tesla, undoubtefully a crazy man, but a genius nonetheless has mentioned that his imagination was very very strong. He could day-dream about objects hovering in space, rotate them as he see fit, squeeze them, enlargen them, change their colour or the shape entirely. He would see the prototype he is trying to build days in advance before putting it on paper. He would dream and hallucinate geometric shapes. But why would nature want him to do that? A defect?

Or is nature providing us with a tool?


